[WIP] Add “Formatting. With style.” post (#273)
src-d/blog: content/post/formatting-with-style.md

---
author: m09
date: 2018-10-12
title: "Formatting. With Style."
image: /post/formatting-with-style/teapot.jpg
description: "Formatting code using existing styles."
categories: ["technical", "MLonCode"]
---

Ensuring that a codebase is consistent in style is both hard and
costly, yet it is extremely important for maintainability and to
reduce technical debt. Why is it hard and costly?  There are many
contributing factors but the main ones are certainly:

- teams might not have set up a linting process early enough or at all

> - people handling the codebase might be changing on a regular basis

Reviewer: also: linters do not cover everything. Besides, they can be hard to set up to their full power or can be too opinionated.

To allow new or current team members to code in a consistent way, we
therefore need to model existing style and use it to lint new code. At
source{d}, we call that breakfast. Let's go!

## Lookout

This problem is one of the many painpoints we are currently tackling
with [Lookout](https://github.com/src-d/lookout), our brand new and

> frankly awesome assisted code review framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
awesome assisted code review framework.
```

The purpose of Lookout is to bring assisted code review to anyone in
an easy-to-setup, easy-to-use, easy-to-extend fashion. To achieve
that, Lookout watches Github repos and triggers a set of analyzers

> when new code is pull-request-ed or pushed. Those analyzers are very

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when new code is sent for review or pushed. Those analyzers are very
```

easy to define (they are based on the gRPC toolsuite).

> In our case, when new code is pushed, we want to learn from a codebase

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our case, when new code is pushed, we want to learn from the codebase
```

> to model its style as precisely as possible. When new code is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to model it's style as precisely as possible. When new code is
```

Author: its is correct here

> pull-request-ed, we analyze it to detect any styling issue and report

Reviewer: `to detect problems with style and suggest their fixes as code review comments. Particularly, we leverage [GitHub Suggested Changes](link)`

it for consideration during code review.

## Unsupervised Learning

> Let's now dive into the Machine Learning side of things! In our first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's now dive into the Machine Learning side of things. In our first
```

> approach and to come up with a solution that completely addressed this

Reviewer: consider rephrasing here, "to come up ... codebase" part is hard to understand (at least for me)

problem of linting code given an existing codebase, we defined several
keypoints to achieve:

> - only require the code of one repository to be train our model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a single repository as a training set
```

- output something interpretable (to be accountable and establish
  trust with our users —a key point of Machine Learning in production)

> - come up with an correctable model: if a team is not happy with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- come up with a correctable model: if the users are not happy with some
```

>   suggestions of the machine-learning based model, it should be able

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  suggestions of the model, it should be able
```

(I think we are clear enough at this point that we use ML)

>   to correct its suggestions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to correct it's suggestions
```

To satisfy all those needs with a single approach, we turned to good

> old, battle-tested machine learning methods: language models and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
old battle-tested machine learning methods: language models and
```

decision trees.

### Language models

> To define the style of a repository, we summoned a tool used every day

Reviewer: In order to define the style of a repository, we turned to the well-known Natural Language Processing subjects: language models.

by Natural Language Processing practitioners: language models. A

> language model tries to find out which next word is the most likely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
language model tries to find out which word most likely follows
```

> given the previous words in a sentence. In our case, we'll use them to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
given the sequence of previous words in a sentence. In our case, we'll use them to
```

find out which next token is the most likely given the previous tokens
in some code.

Consider this example where we try to find out what `_` could be:

    if a_

Given the previous tokens `if`, ` ` and `a`, what would be the most
likely next token `_`? There is not a single correct answer but rather

> a probability distribution over possible tokens. We could for example

Reviewer: We can learn, for example:

learn:

    p(" ") = 0.4
    p(":") = 0.6

`p(" ")` would model the cases where the `if` condition is complex
(`if a and len(some_list) > 5:`) and `p(":")` would model the cases
where the `if` condition is already complete (`if a:`).

A language model is simply the set of such probability distributions
computed for all interesting inputs (all interesting sequences of
previous tokens).

This model is rather simple and has a big advantage: it doesn't

> require any labeled training data. That means that the engineers that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
require any labeled training data. That means that the engineers who
```

will use the model won't have to spend time giving examples of correct

> style and bad style: we'll learn that without any intervention!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
style and bad style: we'll learn them without any intervention!
```

> To give some more power to our language models, we do not restrict the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give more power to our language models, we do not restrict the
```

> tokens we base our predictions on to previous tokens but also to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tokens we base our predictions on to preceeding, but we also inspect
```

> words that follow the character that we are predicting. Still, the

Reviewer: character -> token?

idea is very close to a vanilla language model.

Before diving into the specifics of the models we used, let's

> elaborate on this point and review how we create the window of tokens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
elaborate on this point and review how we create the window over tokens
```

> to consider to predict a formatting element and how we model the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to consider and how we model the
```

Otherwise, "formatting element" is a new entity which we do not mention before (do we?) and readers can be confused

> ---

Reviewer 2: I like the blog post a lot, but I think it could use some more specific examples of how this actually works and what a given rule might look like.

author: m09
date: 2018-10-12
title: "Formatting. With Style."
image: /post/formatting-with-style/teapot.jpg
description: "Formatting code using existing styles."
categories: ["technical", "MLonCode"]
---

Ensuring that a codebase is consistent in style is both hard and
costly, yet it is extremely important for maintainability and to
reduce technical debt. Why is it hard and costly?  There are many
contributing factors but the main ones are certainly:

- teams might not have set up a linting process early enough or at all
- people handling the codebase might be changing on a regular basis

> - linters do not cover everything. Besides, they can be hard to set up

Reviewer 2: can you give an example of something they don't cover that this tool does?

  to their full power or can be too opinionated

> To allow new or current team members to code in a consistent way, we

Reviewer 2: s/allow/help/?

> therefore need to model existing style and use it to lint new code. At

Reviewer 2: drop the `therefore`

source{d}, we call that breakfast. Let's go!

## Lookout

> This problem is one of the many painpoints we are currently tackling

Reviewer 2: pain points is two words

with [Lookout](https://github.com/src-d/lookout), our brand new and
awesome assisted code review framework.

The purpose of Lookout is to bring assisted code review to anyone in
an easy-to-setup, easy-to-use, easy-to-extend fashion. To achieve
that, Lookout watches Github repos and triggers a set of analyzers
when new code is sent for review or pushed. Those analyzers are very

> easy to define (they are based on the gRPC toolsuite).

Reviewer 2: tool suite is two words

In our case, when new code is pushed, we want to learn from the
codebase to model its style as precisely as possible. When new code is
sent for review, we analyze it to detect problems with style and
suggest their fixes as code review comments. Particularly, we leverage
[GitHub Suggested
Changes](https://blog.github.com/2018-11-01-suggested-changes-update/).

## Unsupervised Learning

Let's now dive into the Machine Learning side of things. For our first

> approach, we defined a set of requirements that we wanted to statisfy:

Reviewer 2: s/statisfy/satisfy/

- a single repository as a training set
- an interpretable output (to be accountable and establish trust with
  our users —a key point of Machine Learning in production)

> - a correctable model: if the users are not happy with the some

Reviewer 3: ~~the~~

the sequence of previous words in a sentence. In our case, we'll use
them to find out which next token is the most likely given the
previous tokens in some code.

Consider this example where we try to find out what `_` could be:

    if a_

Given the previous tokens `if`, ` ` and `a`, what would be the most
likely next token `_`? There is not a single correct answer but rather
a probability distribution over possible tokens. We can learn, for
example:

    p(" ") = 0.4
    p(":") = 0.6

`p(" ")` would model the cases where the `if` condition is complex
(`if a and len(some_list) > 5:`) and `p(":")` would model the cases
where the `if` condition is already complete (`if a:`).

A language model is simply the set of such probability distributions
computed for all interesting inputs (all interesting sequences of
previous tokens).

This model is rather simple and has a big advantage: it doesn't
require any labeled training data. That means that the engineers who
will use the model won't have to spend time giving examples of correct
style and bad style: we'll learn them without any intervention!

To give more power to our language models, we do not restrict what we

> base our predictions on to preceeding tokens but we also inspect the

Reviewer 2: preceding

words that follow the token that we are predicting. Still, the idea is
very close to a vanilla language model.

Before diving into the specifics of the models we used, let's
elaborate on this point and review how we create the window over
tokens to consider and how we model the elements in those windows.

### Feature Extraction

The backbone of our features is
[Babelfish](https://docs.sourced.tech/babelfish) (as often in the
Machine Learning team at source{d}). It allows us to extract Abstract

> Syntax Trees (ASTs) that are universal (UASTs), ie, not language

Reviewer 2: i.e. language agnostic.

dependent.

The advantage of using UASTs over the sequence of tokens is that we
leverage the structural information: are we in a function? In a
boolean expression? Is this a lambda expression? We can answer all
those questions easily with UASTs, while our models would need to work
extra-hard to understand the structure by itself from token sequences.

Once we have the UAST for a given file, we investigate neighbor tokens
within a fixed size window around each formatting element we want to
predict. The shape of the default window is:

- 5 tokens to the left
- 5 tokens to the right

> - 2 nodes up the parent hierarchy

Reviewer 2: up "from"? up "towards"?

Author: I have a hard time choosing because the current formulation seems the most fluent to me (and google ngram seems to concur). I'll let it as is for now but please comment to specify which option is the best if needed.

![Example of the window around a character
`'`](/post/formatting-with-style/features.png)

This approach mixes sequential information with structural
information, therefore giving our models a wide array of tools to work
with.

For all those elements, we extract features such as:

- [Babelfish role](https://docs.sourced.tech/babelfish/uast/roles)
  (ie: FUNCTION, LITERAL, ADD, etc)
- length of the token
- offset difference
- and many more

### Decision Trees

In short, decision trees group the examples seen in the training
dataset into different leaves. The leaves are created in a way that

> tries to minimize the diversity of the examples in each leave.

Reviewer 3: *leaf

> tries to minimize the diversity of the examples in each leave.

Reviewer 3: *leaf

> This [Wikipedia

Reviewer 2: The [Wikipedia page on decision tree learning](...) provides ...

page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_tree_learning) provides a
more detailed introduction to the learning algorithm.

### From tree to rules

Trees are already somewhat of a whitebox model: they can be drawn and
people can inspect them to understand why a decision was made. Still,
we wanted to improve a bit on this interpretability.

We transform individual branches of the trees into rules, by simple
concatenation of the conditions in the nodes encountered along a given
branch.

Let's consider the [classical example of the survivors on the
Titanic](https://www.kaggle.com/c/titanic), for the following tree:

       age > 18
          /\
         /  \
     sex=M   A
       /\
      D  A

We would create three rules:

- `if age > 18 and sex is M, sample is classified D`
- `if age > 18 and sex is not M, sample is classified A`
- `if age <= 18, sample is classified A`

This way we can only display one rule (or a few rules) and still
understand, at least partially, why the model made a decision.

### Evaluation

> We created a few articial datasets to make sure that we could detect

Reviewer 2: artificial

rogue style and propose meaningful fixes. Some of those datasets used
manually inserted mistakes while the others were created using simple
automatic transformations.

## Meta Learning

Still, as Machine Learning engineers, we are always eager to use data
if it is available. For this reason we're working on the second
iteration of our format analyzer, which works in two distinct steps:
first it learns to model style on many repositories, then it is
applied to a given codebase.

To be clear though, our goal is still __not__ to model _global style
practices_. For this reason, we don't want to use the standard
supervised learning approaches but investigate meta-learning
instead. Meta-learning can be described as the set of techniques that

> allow to _learn how to learn_.

Reviewer 2: allow Learning how to Learn

The plan is as follows:

1. Learn how to learn to model style in a given repository by
   leveraging all the repositories which are relevant
2. Apply this knowledge to model a particular repository

This scheme is quite different from supervised learning.

To achieve the meta learning objective, we consider using well-known
deep learning techniques:

### Step 1, learning to learn

The first phase and also the most time-consuming one is to train an
efficient, general model that can learn how to model style in a repo
with minimal effort.

Therefore we exploit the idea of an _embedding_ to model style, with a
twist: the embedding is the only place where the model can store
information about the style of a repository and hence __has__ to
condense __all the style information__.

### Step 2, applying the formatter to new repositories

Since the style embedding is the only place where our model can encode
style information about a repository, we can use techniques that are
well-known in both Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision
communities to find the embedding that most closely models the style.

And that's all: since all of the style information belongs to one

> single place, we've nothing to do.

Reviewer 3: we've nothing **else** to do ?

### Why does it work?

The described two-step process is efficient because the adopted model
architecture can be arbitrarily complex and expressive to produce
style hints. It can learn how certain styles are applied in certain
corner cases in millions of repositories.

Yet, it is easy to model style for a single repository since the core
of what varies is encoded in a central place.

> 

Author: I like the section idea, thanks :+1:

(`if a and len(some_list) > 5:`) and `p(":")` would model the cases
where the `if` condition is already complete (`if a:`).

A language model is simply the set of such probability distributions
computed for all interesting inputs (all interesting sequences of
previous tokens).

This model is rather simple and has a big advantage: it doesn't
require any labeled training data. That means that the engineers who
will use the model won't have to spend time giving examples of correct
style and bad style: we'll learn them without any intervention!

To give more power to our language models, we do not restrict what we
base our predictions on to preceeding tokens but we also inspect the
words that follow the token that we are predicting. Still, the idea is
very close to a vanilla language model.

Before diving into the specifics of the models we used, let's
elaborate on this point and review how we create the window over
tokens to consider and how we model the elements in those windows.

### Feature Extraction

The backbone of our features is Babelfish (as often in the Machine
Learning team at source{d}!). It allows us to extract Abstract Syntax

> Trees (ASTs) that are universal (UASTs), ie, not language dependent.

Author: not in the sense that roles are shared amongst languages for example.

The advantage of using UASTs over the simple sequence of tokens that
we could have used is that we get structure: are we in a function? In
a boolean expression? Is this a lambda expression? We can answer all
those questions easily with UASTs while our models would need to work
extra-hard to understand this structure by itself from only a sequence
of tokens.

Once we have the UAST for a given file, we extract info about a window
around each formatting element we want to predict. The windows would
by default be:

- 5 tokens to the left
- 5 tokens to the right
- 2 nodes in the parent hierarchy

![Example of Window around the character
`'`](/post/formatting-with-style/features.png)

This mixes sequential information and structural information,
therefore giving our models a wide array of tools to work with.

For all those elements, we extract features such as:

- Babelfish role (ie: FUNCTION, LITERAL, ADD, etc)
- length
- offset difference
- and many more

### Decision Trees

To introduce them quickly to our unfamiliar readers, decision trees
group the examples seen in the training dataset into different
leaves. The leaves are created in a way that tries to minimize the

> diversity of the examples in each leave.

Author: I think that https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_tree_learning might be well-balanced: it's not too detail-heavy but still doesn't hide much and is overall quite didactic

following tree:

       age > 18
          /\
         /  \
     sex=M   A
       /\
      D  A

We would create three rules:

- `if age > 18 and sex is M, sample is classified D`
- `if age > 18 and sex is not M, sample is classified A`
- `if age <= 18, sample is classified A`

This way we can only display one rule (or a few rules) and still
understand (partly) why the model made a decision.

### Evaluation

To evaluate those models, we created articial datasets to make sure
that we could detect rogue style and propose meaningful fixes. Some of
those datasets used manually inserted mistakes while others were
created using simple automatic transformations.

## Meta Learning

As detailed in the previous section on our first approach, we first
considered methods which only required the target codebase as input to
work. This already allowed us to train models that addressed the
painpoint we wanted to annihilate.

Still, as Machine Learning engineers, we are always sad not to use
data when it is widely available. For this reason we're working on a
second incarnation of our format analyzer, that works in two distinct
steps: first it learns to model style on many repositories, then it is

> applied to a given codebase. This is in opposition to our first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
applied to a given codebase.
```

approach, which only did the latter.

To be clear though, our goal is still __not__ to model _global style

> practices_. For this reason, we don't want to use standard supervised

Reviewer: ```suggestion
practices_. For this reason, we don't want to use the standard supervised
```

> learning approaches but instead have turned to meta-learning, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
learning approaches but investigate meta-learning instead. Meta-learning
```

can be described as the set of techniques that allow to _learn how to
learn_.

> The plan is simple:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plan is as follows:
```

> 1. Learn how to learn to model style on a given repository thanks to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Learn how to learn to model style in a given repository by leveraging
```

>    all the repositories we can find

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   all the repositories which are relevant
```

> 2. Apply this knowledge to model one precise repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Apply this knowledge to model a particular repository
```

> This is quite different from simple supervised learning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This scheme is quite different from supervised learning.
```

> To achieve this meta learning objective, we plan to use known deep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve the meta-learning objective, we consider using well-known deep
```

learning techniques:

### Step 1, learning to learn

> The first phase and the most time-consumming one is to train an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first phase and also the most time-consuming one is to train an
```

efficient, general model that can learn how to model style in a repo

> given minimal effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with minimal effort.
```

> To do that, we use use the common idea of an _embedding_ to model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore we exploit the idea of an _embedding_ to model
```

style, with a twist: the embedding is the only place where the model

> can store information about the style of a repository and therefore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can store information about the style of a repository and hence
```

> __has__ to condense __all the style information__ into it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__has__ to condense __all the style information__.
```

### Step 2, applying the formatter to new repositories

Since the style embedding is the only place where our model can encode
style information about a repository, we can use techniques that are
well-known in both Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision
communities to find the embedding that most closely models the style

> of the repository at hand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> And that's it! Since all of the style information is condensed into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's all: since all the style information belongs to
```

one single place, we've nothing to do.

### Why does it work?

> This simple two-steps process is very efficient because the model used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The described two-step process is efficient because the adopted model architecture
```

> can be extremely complex and expressive to use the style embedding to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be arbitrarily complex and expressive to 
```

produce style hints. It can learn on millions of repositories how

> certain styles are applied in certain corner cases.

Reviewer: It can learn how certain styles are applied in certain corner cases in millions of repositories.

> Yet, it is very simple to tell it to model style for a given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yet, it is easy to model style for a single 
```

> repository since the core of what varies is encoded in a single place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
repository since the core of what varies is encoded in the only place.
```

Author: I feel like this change is detrimental to the sentence, let me know if you still want me to merge it!

Reviewer: It basically avoids "single" because we've been using this word many times already. Do you know any other way to not say "single"?

Reviewer: OK, "central" is cool

### To be continued!

> We are still at the very preliminary steps of this second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are making early steps towards the second
```

approach. Let's wish it a bright future that will allow engineers

> across the world to focus on problems more value-heavy than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
across the world to focus on problems more exciting than maintaining the proper code formatting.
```

And that's all: since all of the style information belongs to one
single place, we've nothing else to do.

### Why does it work?

The described two-step process is efficient because the adopted model
architecture can be arbitrarily complex and expressive to produce
style hints. It can learn how certain styles are applied in certain
corner cases in millions of repositories.

Yet, it is easy to model style for a single repository since the core
of what varies is encoded in a central place.

### Possibilities

Meta learning enables lots of new applications. Among the most
exciting ones we could cite:

- apply a specific style to your repository (Google's, another team's, etc)
- find existing styles with documented guidelines that most closely match an
  unknown style
- perform style analysis at a fine granularity (directory granularity
  instead of project granularity). This is made possible by the
  reduced need for data during the second step

## To be continued!

We are making early steps towards the second approach. Let's wish
Format Analyzer a bright future that will allow engineers across the
world to focus on problems more exciting than maintaining the proper
code formatting.

> Don't want to miss the next blog post about how source{d} ML team does

Reviewer 4: I think these CTA should be secondary, the main CTA is trying Lookout on a test repo.
